JUDY WOODRUFF: Both jobs and
wages show an increase In may,
boosting chances the Federal
Reserve will start to raise
interest rates later this year.
Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
Also ahead: cyber-attack on a
massive scale. Hackers steal
personal data for millions
of federal government
workers in the U.S.
Then: cracking Ebola's code.
Scientists hunt for a low-tech,
accurate test to rapidly
diagnose the virus before
the worst symptoms appear.
MILES O'BRIEN: It's not as
accurate as the genetic
technique, but it is as easy as
a
home pregnancy test. Two lines
on the left means positive for
everyone, one line on the
right, negative.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it's Friday.
Mark Shields and David Brooks
analyze the week's news.
Those are some of the stories
we're covering on tonight's "PBS
NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: It turns out the
economic recovery regained some
of its mojo in may.
Today's Labor Department report
shows employers added a net of
280,000 jobs, far more than
expected. The unemployment rate
ticked up to 5.5 percent as more
people were encouraged
enough to look for work.
All in all, it marked a rebound
from the year's first quarter.
We will delve into the data,
right after the news summary.
OPEC opted today not to cut its
oil output. Cartel officials
said that means the price
of crude oil and, in turn, the
price of gasoline are likely to
stay relatively low for the
time being. In New York, oil
closed just above $59 a barrel.
On Wall Street, the economic
news raised fears that the
Federal Reserve might raise
interest
rates sooner than hoped to head
off inflation. The Dow Jones
industrial average lost 56
points to close at 17850. The
Nasdaq rose nine points, but the
S&P 500 slipped three.
For the week, the Dow and the
S&P fell not quite 1 percent.
The Nasdaq was flat.
The prime minister of Greec~
today rejected conditions by
creditors for supplying more
bailout money. Instead, Alexis
Tsipras insisted on debt relief.
He told Parliament that
the European Central Bank, the
European commission and the
International Monetary Fund are
making
-- quote -- "irrational
proposals."
ALEXIS TSIPRAS, Greek Prime
Minister (through translator):
It is time for everyone to
prove that they are working
towards a viable solution and
not to subjugate and humiliate
an entire nation, because if
that is what they are doing,
they should know that they
will have the exact
opposite effect.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Athens shook up
financial markets yesterday when
it opted to defer a
payment to its creditors.
U.S. weapons are finally making
their way to Iraq's military,
under a program created
last year. The Pentagon
confirms it's begun shipping
rifles, machine guns and other
gear.
Just this week, Iraq's prime
minister, Haider al-Abadi,
complained almost none of the
promised
help had been sent.
Meanwhile, Tariq Aziz, Saddam
Hussein's former foreign
minister, died today in a
hospital.
He was awaiting execution for
crimes against humanity.
Recovery crews in China today
raised a capsized cruise ship to
help search for victims. The
vessel overturned Monday night
in the Yangtze River during a
powerful storm. Nearly 340
people who were on board are
still missing. Today, cranes
righted the Eastern Star and
gradually lifted it to reveal
all four decks. Salvage experts
said it was a delicate
operation.
XIONG WEI, Professor, Dalian
Maritime University (through
translator): The ship has a
complex
structure inside, and, besides,
it was filled with water, which
caused uneven distribution
of weight. We needed to make
sure the steel cables wouldn't
break in the hoisting process,
so we had to fix them fast on
the ship, on account of its
entire structure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So far, divers
have recovered 103 bodies, but
only 14 survivors have emerged.
A stunning turnabout today in
Pakistan: Authorities announced
that eight men accused in the
attack
on teen activist Malala
Yousafzai were acquitted for
lack of evidence. Reports in
April said
they'd been convicted and given
life in prison. Malala was shot
in the head in 2012 by a
Taliban gunman who boarded her
school bus. She had advocated
education for girls. Two
other suspects were convicted,
and given life terms.
Back in this country, Northern
Colorado braced for violent
storms again after tornadoes and
flooding last night. No one was
hurt, but daylight showed
several homes ripped to pieces
north of Denver and floodwaters
cutting through roads. The
storm system also dumped up to
three feet of hail, so much that
crews had to use heavy equipment
to clear roads.
A Montana woman is accusing
former House Speaker Dennis
Hastert of sexually abusing her
brother.
Jolene Burdge tells ABC News it
happened when Steven Reinboldt
was in high school in
Illinois and Hastert was a
wrestling coach. Reinboldt died
of AIDS in 1995, and Burdge
says then-Congressman Hastert
appeared at the funeral.
JOLENE BURDGE, Sister of Alleged
Victim: I just looked at him
and said, "I want to know
why you did what you did to my
brother." He just stood there
and stared at me. And then
I just continued to say, "I want
you to know that your secret
didn't die in there with
my brother, and I want you to
remember that I'm out here."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Hastert was
indicted last week on federal
charges that he agreed to
pay $3.5 million to hide
unspecified misconduct.
And the Roman Catholic
Archdiocese of Saint Paul and
Minneapolis was charged today
with
failing to protect children from
sexual abuse. State prosecutors
said the archdiocese waited
too long to tell police about a
priest who molested two boys.
Still to come on the
"NewsHour": job growth
and wage increases signal a step
in the right direction for the
economy; keeping U.S. government
data out of the hands of
international cyber-spies; the
search for a reliable,
inexpensive test
to diagnose Ebola; Mark Shields
and David Brooks on the week's
news; plus, why Turkey's
president seeks to overhaul his
country's constitution and
expand executive power.
We start with a closer look at
the surprisingly strong jobs
report for May.
Many economists said it should
stem fears that the U.S. economy
was cooling after growth
contracted slightly in the
first quarter of the year.
Diane Swonk is senior managing
editor and chief economist for
Mesirow Financial. She
joins me now from Chicago.
Welcome again to the
program, Diane.
So, how good is this news
that we're hearing today?
DIANE SWONK, Senior Managing
Director and Chief Economist,
Mesirow Financial Holdings,
Inc.: Well, it certainly was a
real step in the right
direction, as you mentioned
earlier.
What we saw was very broad-based
gains in employment, with the
exception of the mining
sector, which has been hit by
cuts in the oil industry. What
it showed us is, we could
go through those cuts and
overcome with the job gains we
saw.
We also saw the quality of job
gains improve along with the
quantity. Not only did --
professional
services came back. Temporary
hires came back. Hiring of
college grads picked up
a little bit. We also saw
leisure and hospitality, which
had suffered earlier in the
year, come
back, and that's a sign of a
warming trend in summer bookings
for vacation season.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we saw the
unemployment rate go up. How do
we interpret that?
DIANE SWONK: Well, the
unemployment rate finally went
up for the right reasons. This
is the second month in a row
that we saw more people
optimistic enough to throw their
hat
back in the ring and
actually look for a job.
And that's something the Federal
Reserve has been waiting for,
that along with a little
bit of an uptick in wages,
something that we haven't seen
in a very long time, although
it's still not much. It was the
best year-on-year wage numbers
we have seen since 2011 and
really,
if we want to take it back,
since 2009. And that's when
they were falling apart.
So, that's a step again
in the right direction.
We're inching towards a more
healing and broad-based healing
of the labor market, and
that's something
we'd all welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let's get
to the question that I think is
on the minds of so many, and
that is what's going to happen
to interest rates. The
speculation is that, because
of this, the Fed is more
comfortable raising rates this
fall, but we noticed that,
yesterday,
the head of the IMF, Christine
Lagarde, said no, wait until
next year.
DIANE SWONK: What we're seeing
is the real tug-of-war that is
going on, the disruption
that a rise in interest rate
means to financial markets both
at home and abroad.
And so we have already seen
really a bloody run-up in
interest rates in terms of the
bond
market. We're at 2.4 percent
today, a big jump in interest
rates. The market hadn't
been pricing in liftoff, but
they're sort are go or no go.
So, now they're sort of
pricing in liftoff and no stop.
This is a Federal Reserve that
will be treading -- as if they
were treading on thin ice, even
as the ground beneath us,
economic ground, firms. That
said, they're very conscious
of the issues that Christine
Lagarde brought up, and that is
they deal with financial policy
at home, monetary policy at
home, but whatever happens
abroad does show up on our
shores.
And what the IMF is concerned
about is the ripple effects of
interest rate increases
and how those hit emerging
markets. Those effects, we
know, could come back and come
back on us. And so that's why
the Federal Reserve as it lifts
interest rates is going
to do so ever so cautiously and
it's not going to do so quickly.
It doesn't want to snuff
out the overall recovery and
it's very concerned as well
about the financial market
volatility
that's likely to come from this.
It's been almost a decade
since they raised rates.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's right.
It's been a long time.
And, as you were saying, it's
how gradually they raise them
that will make a lot of
difference.
Diane Swonk, we thank you.
DIANE SWONK: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The FBI said
today it is investigating a
massive cyber-security breach
at the Office of Personnel
Management. Files stored there
containing personal information
on millions of U.S. government
employees, including those with
high-level security clearance,
may have been compromised.
Jeffrey Brown has the story.
JEFFREY BROWN: News reports
citing unnamed U.S. government
officials have said that China
is suspected to be behind the
attacks, though there's been no
official word from the
administration.
A Chinese spokesman had
this to say today:
HONG LEI, Spokesman, Chinese
Foreign Ministry (through
translator): We have seen many
similar media reports and
remarks about this, but are they
scientific? We know that hacker
attacks are conducted
anonymously, across nations, and
that it is hard to track the
source. It's irresponsible and
unscientific to always make
trumped-up presumptions without
deep investigation.
JEFFREY BROWN: At the White
House this afternoon, spokesman
Josh Earnest said cyber-concerns
relating to China are not new.
JOSH EARNEST, White House Press
Secretary: I can't speak to who
may or may not have
been responsible for this
particular incident. But just,
as a general matter, we have
raised
significant concerns about the
way that China and individuals
acting on behalf of the state
of China have acted
in cyberspace.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, for more, we
turn to Dmitri Alperovitch,
co-founder and chief technology
officer of CrowdStrike, an
Internet security firm.
Welcome back to you.
DMITRI ALPEROVITCH, Co-Founder
and CEO, CrowdStrike: Thank
you.
JEFFREY BROWN: Start with the
whodunit this time. What kind
of evidence would point
to China, and would that be
government or some kind of
criminal syndicate?
DMITRI ALPEROVITCH: Well, in
this case, the FBI is the lead
investigator. So, they
have the evidence. They haven't
made it public, so we don't know
necessarily with
certainty this was indeed China.
But it follows a pattern of
behavior that we have seen from
China. You may recall
earlier this year we have seen
all these intrusions into major
insurance companies, where they
were collecting very similar
information on this time tens of
millions of Americans, not
just government workers.
So it's a pattern of activity
that we're seeing that is
clearly an indication that the
Chinese
are trying to great a massive
database of personal
identifiable information,
employment
records, financial records,
medical records on literally
almost the entire American
population.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, let's get
our way back into that. Let's
start this particular -- the
Office of Personnel Management,
why would this particular agency
be targeted?
DMITRI ALPEROVITCH: Well, the
OPM is actually doing the
background investigations on
virtually
every government employee.
There are some agencies that do
it themselves, but most of
the agencies are relying on OPM.
That includes clearance
investigations. These are
massive forms that people fill
out with
all their background
information, all their
financials, all their medical
conditions and
so forth that the OPM then
investigates. So, that record
is a gold mine for both criminal
actors, who would want to
conduct identity theft, as well
as nation states.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, I have
reports that officials know what
kinds of data might have been
exposed,
but they're still not sure,
they're not saying what was
actually taken at this point.
DMITRI ALPEROVITCH:
That's right.
I think, you know, this is still
an active investigation, so they
don't want to tip their
hand. They don't want to alert
the adversary of what they
potentially know.
JEFFREY BROWN: What could be
done with that data? What would
it be used for?
DMITRI ALPEROVITCH: Well, it
depends on who is behind it.
So, if it is China, if is the
nation state of China, then the
concern is really a human
intelligence concern, that
they're building these massive
databases to target people.
If they want to find an
individual that is working for a
sensitive government contractor
or a government agency and they
know that their relative has a
medical condition or
they're in debt financially,
that could be an approach that
they can use to try to recruit
this individual.
It can also be used to identify
potential spies that are working
for the U.S. government
that are trying to penetrate
China. If it's a criminal
actor, then it's a whole other
slew of concerns like identity
theft and financial fraud.
JEFFREY BROWN: And that would
tie it to -- as you said
earlier, to some of these
earlier
things we saw, some of the
health insurance companies,
Anthem and others, that have
happened
this year.
DMITRI ALPEROVITCH: That's
exactly right. And those have
been attributed to China.
And we know that the Chinese are
trying to collect this
information as an effort for
their intelligence apparatus.
JEFFREY BROWN: Now, this is a
strike against the U.S.
government, and the
administration
has after all made a big effort
in this area. Does it suggest
that nothing is safe, or
does it suggest that the U.S.
government has really not done
enough with its technology?
DMITRI ALPEROVITCH: You know,
almost half-a-decade ago, I said
that there are only two types
of organizations, either
government agencies or
companies, those that know they
have been
hacked and those
that don't yet know.
And this case just proves that
no one is invincible in
cyberspace. Government
agencies, we had
the White House getting hacked
last year, the State Department
and certainly numerous
companies that are coming under
assault from nation states, from
criminal actors, and it's
really inevitable.
JEFFREY BROWN: I did note
officials were taking some
solace in that they detected
this.
Is there better detection now,
even if there's not better
prevention at this point?
DMITRI ALPEROVITCH: Well, I
actually have to compliment
them. Even though it took
them a couple of months to
detect it, which sounds like a
long time, and it is, it's
actually
better than the
industry average.
The industry average is about
seven to eight months from the
time of a compromise to when
it's being detected. They
actually did it in a couple of
months, which is great, but
obviously not good enough. It
needs to be done much faster.
And you really need to
prevent the attacker from
actually being able to
exfiltrate that data, to steal
that data
out of the organization. That's
when you ultimately can be
successful.
JEFFREY BROWN: Now, to the
extent the focus is on the
Chinese government, outrage at
the
Chinese government, at the same
time, if it is them, is this
something that the U.S.
government
does as well?
DMITRI ALPEROVITCH: Well, this
clearly has, if it is the
Chinese government, an
intelligence
focus and an intelligence
mission, so you would assume
that the U.S. government is
doing
similar things in
cyberspace and beyond.
So it would be hard for us to
confront the Chinese on this
issue, because it falls into
that realm of national
security-related espionage that
is the norm that everyone does.
JEFFREY BROWN: And very
briefly, we're focusing on some
of these big thefts, when you
come
and others join us on this, but
this is going on all the time in
various forms?
DMITRI ALPEROVITCH: Exactly.
And, oftentimes, we think of
these hacks as discrete events,
a company gets hacked or
an organization gets hacked,
they clean it up, and six months
later, they announce that
it is another hack. What
happens in reality is that these
attackers are persistent. The
minute they're kicked out of a
network, they go back in that
same day, or try to anyway.
It's oftentimes a continuous
event, where you're continuously
compromised and you just
discover it in
six-month increments.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right,
Dmitri Alperovitch, thank you so
much.
DMITRI ALPEROVITCH: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We continue now
our series of reports on Ebola
by science correspondent
Miles O'Brien.
Tonight, Miles looks at efforts
to create faster, more reliable
testing for the virus.
MILES O'BRIEN: In the dusty,
crowded alleys of this market
town near Kambia, Sierra Leone,
people stick close together and
rely on each other. Here, there
is no mistaking where
Ebola has taken its deadly toll.
The quarantines are marked by
rope and plastic bags, enforced
by soldiers, and monitored
by people like this man.
DR. PATRICK OTIM, World Health
Organization: I owe it to the
people of Sierra Leone to
give any help that I can.
MILES O'BRIEN: DR. Patrick Otim
is an epidemiologist, a disease
detective from South Sudan, a
volunteer
for the World Health
Organization. He helps by doing
these crucial house calls.
DR. PATRICK OTIM: Where we can
closely monitor them, so that
the moment the person becomes
symptomatic, we're able to
detect that and we pick them out
from the community.
MILES O'BRIEN: Eleven days ago,
the mother of these two boys, 3
and 5, was transported
to an Ebola treatment center.
The virus claimed her life a few
days later. Just
yesterday, their father also got
sick and was also taken away.
No one here, the boys
and their aunt and uncle, will
be deemed Ebola-free until 21
days after they were in contact
with
someone carrying the virus
and showing symptoms.
MAN (through translator): They
say that's how they have the
contain this outbreak. We
wish to do it that way. But
it's been really hard for me and
my family.
MILES O'BRIEN: For 11 days,
they have been unable to leave
here, and now they are in
need of supplies, food and
water. The delivery is
carefully placed just outside
the cordon.
Everyone, including the boys,
pitches in to get it inside.
We, too, must keep our
distance as we speak with them.
MAN (through translator): We're
not sure about what happens
tomorrow, but for, now
we're, not feeling
any illness at all.
MILES O'BRIEN: Using an
infrared thermometer, they check
for fevers; 37 degrees Celsius
is 98.6 Fahrenheit.
So far, so good.
But then we get a scare. It's a
102-degree Fahrenheit fever.
The second reading is
no better. Then a new infrared
thermometer, still high, so
finally they pass along a
traditional
thermometer. With it tucked
inside the boy's armpit, we all
hold our breath.
DR. PATRICK OTIM: And, usually,
if we detect any fever, and then
immediately for anyone
in a quarantine house, the
moment they have a fever, we
have to take them for testing.
MILES O'BRIEN: The final
reading is borderline. But,
remember, the boy had been
toting water
bottles in the hot sun, so Dr.
Otim doesn't think drastic
action is warranted. But he
vows to give both
boys extra scrutiny.
DR. PATRICK OTIM: The moment
they have any other symptoms,
just fever or a headache,
joint pain or sore throat, then
you need to be very proactive.
MILES O'BRIEN: It's an educated
guess, but a guess just the
same.
Basically, you're fighting
Ebola with a thermometer...
DR. PATRICK OTIM: Yes. Yes.
MILES O'BRIEN: ... which seems
like you could do -- we could do
better in this day
and age, right?
DR. PATRICK OTIM: Yes. Yes.
Yes. It seems we could do
better, but, unfortunately,
that's all we have for now.
MILES O'BRIEN: So, on the front
lines, the simple thermometer
remains the primary, really
the only way to sort out people
who might have Ebola, and is, of
course, terribly inaccurate
and doesn't differentiate
between Ebola and any number of
other diseases.
What health care workers tell us
time and again is they need
something in between the
thermometer and the cumbersome
and expensive genetic testing.
Not far from the cordoned
home, an old customs building
near the Ghanaian border is now
a makeshift genetic testing
facility. Blood from the boys'
father comes here. Workers
handle the samples with great
care and multiple safeguards.
WOMAN: This bench is
the extraction bench.
MILES O'BRIEN: The genetic test
is called polymerase chain
reaction, or PCR, where machines
repeatedly heat and cool the
blood sample, causing the RNA in
the virus to replicate
itself over and over again.
It's a precise way to determine
if a person has Ebola, but
the machines are expensive,
complex and they don't provide
quick answers.
WOMAN: And if you look at it,
it's almost the same curve as
this patient that is positive.
MILES O'BRIEN: While
they wait for results,
the father is taken to an Ebola
treatment center run by the
International Medical Corps.
Doctors here must assume and
dress for the worst. And,
unfortunately, in this case,
that is warranted. The genetic
test confirms the father has
Ebola.
The grim verdict comes 48 hours
after the ambulance took him
away from his boys. And
with Ebola, any delay can be
deadly. It's either two extra
days for the virus to spread
or it means a person without
Ebola might wait two days near
patients who are very sick and
extremely contagious.
In Kenema, a few hundred miles
away, they're using a prototype
Ebola test that is fast
and simple.
MAN: Sample for Ebola.
MILES O'BRIEN: The rapid test
was developed by a Colorado
company called Corgenix.
Instead
of looking for genetic material,
the Corgenix test looks for
antigens, proteins on the Ebola
virus surface. It's not as
accurate as the genetic
technique, but it is as easy as
a
home pregnancy test.
Two lines on the left means
positive for Ebola, one line on
the right negative, no Ebola.
It is a low-tech solution, to be
sure. But, as it turns out, low
tech is the cutting edge
in the world of
rapid diagnostics.
LEE GEHRKE, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology: It's
very simple, requires no
refrigeration,
no power, no special training.
MILES O'BRIEN: At MIT,
biologist Lee Gehrke leads a
team that is creating,
assembling
and shipping do-it-yourself
diagnostic kits designed to give
health workers in the field
the ability to make their own
tests for multiple pathogens at
once, Ebola, yellow fever and
dengue, for starters.
The solutions contain antibodies
to these diseases, our natural
defenses. They have
found a novel way to color-code
them using gold nanoparticles of
varying size. So,
whichever antibodies are engaged
in battle with the disease will
leave telltale proof
of what ails a patient.
It's all open-source, no
patents. Gehrke says the test
costs $5 now and could get
cheaper.
Why haven't we had an easier
test for Ebola sooner?
LEE GEHRKE: That's a very
important question. And I
think, unfortunately, part of
the
answer is economics. It boils
down to whether there are
markets for these devices
because
many of these viruses appear as
hot spots and then go away.
There's no constant market.
MILES O'BRIEN: But an
entrepreneur in Cambridge with
MIT and Harvard lineage believes
there
is a market for a device that
strikes a balance between low
tech and high accuracy.
ANITA GOEL, CEO, Nanobiosym:
Drop of blood here to the chip.
MILES O'BRIEN: Anita Goel is
CEO of a startup called
Nanobiosym. Her device is
called
Gene-RADAR.
ANITA GOEL: So, now what is
happening is, it's processing
the blood and it's getting
ready to get the RNA of the
virus. Once it gets that, then
it's going to start copying
it.
MILES O'BRIEN: She claims the
device is nearly as accurate as
traditional genetic
testing, but that it will be 10
times cheaper. The idea is to
detect the Ebola virus before
it reaches the threshold
when symptoms appear.
ANITA GOEL: Whether they have
the Ebola virus or not and
quantify what that viral
load is.
MILES O'BRIEN: It sounds great,
but it isn't ready for prime
time yet, not enough proof
that it works. MIT biologist
Lee Gehrke is skeptical.
LEE GEHRKE: The disadvantage
with fancy technologies is that
they are fancy technologies.
And the question is, if they're
sent to these countries, if they
break, what will
happen? Can they be fixed?
MILES O'BRIEN: A good question
in places like Kambia, where the
poverty is crushing.
For now, Dr. Otim and colleagues
keep visiting the boy and his
family once, sometimes twice
a day, wielding
only thermometers.
MAN (through translator): I
feel very confident that we will
survive this. We will pull
through. We are really
optimistic that we will end up
free of Ebola.
MILES O'BRIEN: Sadly, his
brother, the father of the boys,
died, leaving them orphaned.
Their quarantine clock is reset,
another 21 days of constant
surveillance and temperature
checks, waiting to learn
if they have been spared.
But, long after we leave, we get
the word they're all OK. Maybe
next time, the cures
will be better and the
answers will come sooner.
Miles O'Brien, the "PBS
NewsHour," Kambia, Sierra Leone.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Miles' next two
reports in his Ebola series air
next week. Tune in
Thursday and Friday.
Now to the analysis of Shields
and Brooks. That's syndicated
columnist Mark Shields
and New York Times columnist
David Brooks, who joins us from
New Jersey.
Gentlemen, it's good
to have you both.
2016, David, Mark, four
candidates have entered the race
just since the last time we were
together.
David, let's talk about the
Democrats first. How does the
addition of Martin O'Malley
and Lincoln Chafee affect the
shape of the race? Size up
their candidacies for us.
DAVID BROOKS: Well, Chafee
seems a completely implausible
candidate, but he does have one
issue that he will raise, where
he opposed the Iraq War. And so
Hillary Clinton supported
it.
And it will be interesting to
see how that plays out, whether
it's significant. I think
it's probably passed its sell
date, at least in the Democratic
primaries. But that's
something she will have to
talk about and defend again.
Martin O'Malley is a
plausible candidate.
I'm of the belief that Hillary
Clinton's major opponent is
herself and that, if she
is going to come down, it is
going to be because of an error
she made or some scandal or
something
like that, and nobody
else can touch her.
But if something does happen to
her campaign, then he seems at
least like a plausible
president.
He was a moderately successful
governor of a pretty major
state. And he presents
well. And so he's more or less
plan B as it stands right now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do
you see them, Mark?
MARK SHIELDS: I see that, first
of all, Martin O'Malley,
two-term governor of Maryland,
and I would agree with David, a
successful governor, and a
liberal governor with appeal
to many of the constituency
groups that are active in
Democratic presidential primary
politics.
He was advanced positions,
progressive on same-sex
marriage, on immigrant rights.
And
I think he presents a -- he's
very charismatic, he's
appealing, he's a good speaker,
plays
the guitar.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: I
mean, he's got...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Important
qualifications.
MARK SHIELDS: You know, but
he's got a certain bobby socks
appeal. He's got a -- he's a
natural politician.
But I think the threat he
represents is, Judy, he, in his
announcement, came out strongly
against Wall Street and said,
you don't get to pass the
presidency back as some sort of
a crown between two royal
families. So, he put Hillary
Clinton and Jeb Bush in the
same category.
And, believe me, that is a
popular line among people on
both sides of the political...
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: So you think
that could affect -- could be
a...
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: I think -- put it
this way, Judy. At this point
in -- Bill Clinton was
at 6 percent, in fifth place.
Michael Dukakis was 21 point
behind. Jimmy Carter didn't
even register in the Gallup Poll
for the entire year before he
was nominated. Democrats
like underdogs and dark horses.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, meanwhile,
David, Hillary Clinton, the
front-runner, is out talking
this week about voting rights,
naming her Republican
challengers one by one. Is this
a smart tactic?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
First, can I note -- Mark, did
you say bobby socks appeal or...
(CROSSTALK)
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: He did.
MARK SHIELDS: I did. I
did. I did say bobby socks.
(CROSSTALK)
DAVID BROOKS: ... are
wearing bobby socks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I was trying not
to show that I recognized what
he was talking about.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
That's right.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: How
about support hoses?
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: ... second
baseman for the Red Sox.
You know, I think Hillary
Clinton, it's a good issue for
her. It's an issue that
mobilizes
a lot of people, especially in
the minority community. She's
clearly trying to reorganize
the Obama coalition. And to do
that, she really has to get the
-- at least similar
turnout levels among
African-Americans, among
Latinos.
And so this is a good issue for
her. I would say that it's
still problematic in this one
regard, that her last campaign
suffered because it didn't have
an overarching theme. It
had a bunch of series of
targeted policies toward
specific constituencies. And
sometimes
you can pay so much attention to
the polls and pick out this
issue to get that -- people
and this issue to get that
person, and that you lose an
overarching theme.
And I say, now that she's
dropping in the polls kind of
significantly now, at least
for right now, that she needs
some big, imaginative
overarching theme to offer a new
narrative,
to counter the things that are
dragging her down right now.
And microtargeting in what
looks like sort of a cynical way
is not necessarily the way to
get there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I want to get to
the Republicans, but what about
this voting rights that Hillary
is talking about?
MARK SHIELDS: I think David is
right. It works politically.
But I think she's right on the
issue, Judy. I mean, we talk
about American exceptionalism.
Our founding fathers limited the
right to vote to white male
property owners. Over
the next 176 years, it was
expanded to include free black
slaves, male, and then
eventually
to women, and then eventually to
African-Americans, and
18-year-olds, and we have
expanded democracy.
And one of the great frauds that
Republicans have perpetrated
over the past generation
has been this idea of voter
fraud, that people are showing
up, 31 cases in 14 years, Judy,
of people stealing identity
or voting improperly.
So, I think she's absolutely
right. It is our responsibility
to make voting available
to as many people as
possible who want to vote.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, maybe she
can get some traction on that.
Well, let's talk quickly
about the Republicans,
David. Former Governor Rick
Perry threw his hat in the ring
just yesterday, Lindsey
Graham earlier this week.
How do they change the shape of
the race, what they're talking
about?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, Lindsey
Graham is a foreign policy
candidate primarily, though
he has been a very effective
legislator. He is the kind of
guy who can work across lines
and can craft coalitions.
And so it seems to make him a
bit of a niche candidate to
raise the foreign policy issue
and maybe shape the debate. But
it's hard to see him rising to
the first tier. Rick
Perry by resume should be in the
first tier, but he ran such a
bad race last time. I
was going through my head trying
to think of somebody who ran
really a bad race and
then suddenly emerged as
a superstar next time.
Candidates tend to get better.
They don't get that much better.
So, I have to remain
as a skeptic. The one person
who is sort of rising in the
buzz sphere is Carly Fiorina,
the former business executive
who has never been elected
really. But she's
outperforming.
She's getting good crowds. And
so if there's any buzz on the
Republican side right now,
it's sort of with
her at the moment.
MARK SHIELDS: I'm a Lindsey
Graham fan. And I think Lindsey
Graham comes with real
credentials and real
credibility, ISIS, foreign
policy, national security. This
is somebody
who is long and deep in the --
on this area. He's
knowledgeable.
You can disagree with his
policies. And I do in many
cases. But he's a real player.
As far as people wanting
bipartisanship, this is someone
who voted for both Elena Kagan
and Sonia Sotomayor to confirm
them. He vs in immigration
reform. He has stood constant
for a path to citizenship and a
path to legal status for
undocumented immigrants.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On
climate change.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes. And, no, I
just -- I think he's a grownup.
John McCain calls
him his illegitimate son because
they're so close on national
security. But I think
Lindsey Graham, in this climate
of concern about ISIS, is a real
factor.
Rick Perry, if he'd done this
year what he did -- had done
four years ago in preparation
and studying and all the rest of
it, he's a natural politician.
He's a very gifted
one-on-one politician. And he
has got a real story to tell. I
mean, the Texas -- whatever
you say about Texas, and wages
not being good or treatment of
workers not being great, there
are millions of jobs. It's
created more jobs than anyplace
in the country.
So, do you get a second chance
to make a first impression?
That's his dilemma.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I do want to ask
you both quickly about what
Lindsey Graham -- you both
have made the point he's making
foreign policy, national
security the main thrust of the
campaign.
David, it raises the question,
do the Republicans have a better
idea, does anybody have a better
idea what to do right now about
the Middle East, about ISIS?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, well,
nobody has a great solution.
But I think Lindsey Graham has
some solutions. And some of the
Republicans have some others
which personally I think are
better than what's Obama is
offering, first to give the
Sunni
tribes some arms directly. The
central government in Baghdad
has not given them anything.
And
so ISIS is pretty much free to
take over. And sending a bunch
of Iranian-backed Shia
militia into the Sunni Triangle
is not actually a great idea.
And that's we, perversely,
are doing.
So, that's one improvement I
think that could be made.
Second, there are reports of
ISIS
convoys are just wandering
unmolested across the
battlefield, and so maybe
stepping up
some of the attacks. And then
not putting American troops on
the front line. Nobody
wants to do that, but putting
more trainers in there, a little
more infrastructure in
there would probably be helpful.
I'm not sure these are great
solutions, but I think the big
solution is, let's try -- let's
not pretend that Sunni or Shia
are going to govern together any
time soon. Let's try
to federalize the system. And
so that's something that --
these are in contrast to
what's been happening in the
last six and even the last 12
years. And a lot of Republicans
are at least standing for -- at
least they have got an
alternative. It's a plausible
alternative.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It would be a
big change, Mark, wouldn't it?
MARK SHIELDS: I'm
not sure, Judy.
I'm not sure the country is
ready for a change. I'm not
sure that there is a certain
trumpet
or even an uncertain trumpet
being sounded by anybody in the
race at this point. I
think there's a limit on
Americans' expectations of what
we can achieve and a
disappointment
and a sense of disenchantment
and a sense almost of tragedy of
what has happened.
At the same time, I don't see
the plan, that we're going to
send troops in when -- how
do we know when they have
succeeded? How do we know when
they come out? And, you
know, I think arming Sunnis at
this point, given the tension
and the reality in Syria
and in Iraq, is maybe helping
ISIS, quite bluntly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we reported
earlier in the show that the
U.S. is finally sending
weapons now to help the Iraqi
army, something that I guess
they were -- the prime minister
had been complaining about.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I want to ask
you both about something we have
watched all this week, and
that is the vice
president and his loss.
We have just seen this striking
outpouring, David, of sympathy
for Joe Biden and the loss
of his son Beau Biden. The
funeral is tomorrow. What is it
about this family and about the
really extraordinary personal
losses that the vice president
has experienced?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, well, there
are some people in Washington
that people just like
on the strength of their
character and on the strength of
their warm heart.
Lindsey Graham -- I agree with
Mark -- Lindsey Graham is one,
but Joe Biden is certainly
another. You could agree or
disagree, but the man has an
extraordinary, glowing heart.
He's a wonderful guy, a decent
human being and a man of
genuineness.
And I only met Beau Biden a few
times, but he struck me as
having some of the same
qualities.
He was a public servant, not a
media hound at all. But when you
met him in off-the-record
setting, he was very warm, and
glowing, and had a big handsome
smile. And so people
just sense, through all the maze
of politics, just genuineness
and a large heart. And
that's what both Bidens,
father and son, have and had.
MARK SHIELDS: I agree
with David, Judy.
I would just add this, that no
parent ever wants to bury a
child. And now, in Joe Biden's
case, some 46 years apart, he's
buried his second child, himself
a father and a husband
and with two children.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Lost
his first wife.
MARK SHIELDS: Lost his first
wife and his daughter in a
tragic accident when he was
29 years old.
And Joe Biden is a model for
every male who is a father or
aspires to be a father, widowed
at the age of 29. He drove two
hours each way back and forth to
work to be home with
his kids at night. And, as he
put it recently at Yale: I did
it because I needed my kids
more than they needed me.
And I would just add one little
P.S. And that is, every year at
Christmas, Joe Biden,
who road Amtrak back and forth
to Wilmington, threw a Christmas
party for the workers who
worked on the train, the
engineers, the conductors, the
people there.
I mean, it just further
example of what David
said. He is a man of a warm
heart, an open heart, generous
heart. And I think the
outpouring,
especially on the president --
the president has been more
unguarded in his own feelings,
I think, about -- toward
Beau Biden and to Joe.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And he will be
speaking tomorrow at the
services.
MARK SHIELDS: That's right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We thank you
both, Mark Shields, David
Brooks.
And we will be back with a look
at critical elections in Turkey.
But, first, it's pledge week on
PBS. This break allows your
public television station
to ask for your support. And
that support helps keep programs
like ours on the air.
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Turkey, at
least two people are dead after
a pair of explosions ripped
through a Kurdish political
rally. It happened in the
mainly Kurdish city of
Diyarbakir.
More than 100 people are
reported injured. An opposition
leader is calling it an attack
against his party and
not an accident.
The incidents come just two days
before Turkey's election, when
millions are expected to endorse
or stop a power play attempt by
the country's controversial
leader.
Our chief foreign affairs
correspondent, Margaret Warner,
explains.
MARGARET WARNER: By law, he's
not supposed to be campaigning,
and his name isn't even
on the ballot, but Turkish
President Tayyip Erdogan looks
and sounds a lot like a
candidate.
RECEP TAYYIP ERDOGAN, Turkish
Prime Minister (through
translator): God willing, the
conquest
will be on election day.
MARGARET WARNER: Turkey heads
to parliamentary elections on
Sunday, to choose among an
alphabet
soup of parties. Erdogan wants
his own A.K. Party to win at
least 60 percent of the seats,
so it can move to change the
constitution and grant
executive-style powers to the
presidency.
But the energy of the new but
the energy of the new HDP
threatens that plan. A
pro-Kurdish
party that's now reaching out to
women, gays and labor, it needs
10 percent of the vote
to gain entry into parliament.
That would make it hard for the
AKP to win the 330 seats
it seeks.
SELAHATTIN DEMIRTAS, Leader, HDP
(through translator): People
think that we're the
only ones who can block
Erdogan's stance of unlimited
power and what he calls a
presidency,
but what we call dictatorship.
MARGARET WARNER: The leading
traditional opposition group,
the Republican People's
Party, or CHP, also charges
Erdogan is threatening the
country's democratic foundation.
KEMAL KILICDAROGLU, Leader, CHP:
(through translator): The
importance of these elections
is democracy. Turkey will
either move toward authoritarian
rule or will opt for democracy.
MARGARET WARNER: Indeed,
Erdogan is already accused of
trying to muzzle dissent, using
intimidation of media outlets
and speeches lashing out at
journalists.
RECEP TAYYIP ERDOGAN (through
translator): They are paid
charlatans. They cannot
endure the fact that you
have a right to speak.
MARGARET WARNER: There's also
widespread criticism of his
costly building spree, including
a 1,000-room palace complex in
Ankara, while Turkey's economy
is lagging, from 7 percent
growth a decade ago to 3
percent expected this year.
Also on voters' minds, the
civil war in neighboring
Syria that's sent nearly two
million refugees into Turkey.
The Erdogan government wants
Syria's President Bashar
al-Assad removed, but is at odds
with the U.S. about how to
make that happen. So far, the
Turks have refused to let U.S.
fighter jets use Incirlik
Air Base to bomb Islamic State
targets in Iraq and Syria.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
Margaret joins me now.
So, Margaret, these attacks at
the Kurdish rally today, what
does it say about any connection
to these elections coming up?
MARGARET WARNER: I think it
shows, Judy, is how high
tensions are running right now,
not only over the election, but
within Turkish society and
politics.
And so this is an election at
which you don't have at stake
the classic issues of war and
peace or the economy. It's
really about Erdogan's wanting
to fulfill this lifelong
dream of becoming another Kemal
Ataturk, the all-powerful
Turkish president who founded
modern Turkey almost
100 years ago.
And the new quirk is that is
what is standing in his way is
this pro-Turkish -- pro-Kurdish
party. And so, though it's not
clear even that today's attack
was deliberate, though
it looks suspiciously so, or who
was behind it, there are plenty
of players with motives,
everyone from operatives from
Erdogan's party who want to sort
of to Turks, don't want for
a pro-Kurdish party, because
they're going to respond with
violence, or in fact Kurdish
militants, who don't want a
pro-Kurdish party in parliament.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, a lot of
tension everywhere you look.
MARGARET WARNER: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What role is
Erdogan himself playing in
stirring all this up?
MARGARET WARNER: Oh, a huge
role, Judy. It's not only in
stirring it up, but that
he's become the focus of it.
Now, you remember, when he was
elected in 2002, he came from a
party with Islamist roots. And
so, first of all,
the secular Turks were very
worried that he was going to
completely Islamicize Turkish
society. And he did move to
change education and the system
and so forth.
But the business community found
he was incredibly helpful to
them. He jump-started the
Turkish
economy. They had growth rates
of 9, 10 percent last time I was
there. So, everybody
kind of came to live with him.
But then, the last three or four
years -- and he won a lot of
elections by very big margins
-- the last three or four years,
his autocratic tendencies are
really coming to fore. He
silences dissent, whether it's
protesters in Gezi Park, whether
it's journalists, whether
it's opposition figures. He
even fires prosecutors
investigating his own
government.
And so what you have now is, of
course he still has a huge base
of rural, conservative,
Islamic support. And nobody
thinks he won't win most votes
or his party won't win most.
But enough voters are telling
pollsters that they are worried
that, if he gets the
kind of huge margin he wants to
ram through this constitutional
change, then he will become
very much like Russia's Vladimir
Putin, in other words, an
elected, but authoritarian
ruler.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, finally, I
know you have been talking to
people in Washington. What
are they saying, officials here
saying about how this -- how the
U.S. sees all this?
MARGARET WARNER: Well,
three things, Judy.
First of all, they are very
concerned by a lot of the
rhetoric and polarizing rhetoric
of this campaign, including from
Erdogan himself, a lot of
anti-U.S., anti-Israel, there's
an
international conspiracy
against me. OK.
Two, however, they don't think
it is going to really affect the
cooperation or a lack
of cooperation on the
all-important issue of how to
approach Syria and Iraq. Those
differences are more
deep-seated than that.
What does worry some U.S.
officials is the prospect of a
destabilized Turkey in any way.
In other words, there are
scenarios -- for instance, if
the pro-Kurdish party wins by
just a razor-thin margin, and
there is suspicions of fraud,
that could bring out protests
and
so on.
And the U.S. still needs Turkey
as a strong, stable ally on
issues, everything from a
missile
shield to negotiations with
Iran. So they don't need a
distracted Turkish government.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I know you
are going to be watching the
elections on Sunday. We're
going to have you back Monday to
talk about what it all -- what
came out of it.
Margaret Warner, we thank you.
MARGARET WARNER: As always.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight:
our "NewsHour" Shares of the
day, something that caught our
eye which might be of
interest to you, too.
Today is the 30th anniversary of
perhaps the most famous day off
in history. It's when
Ferris Bueller played hooky in
the classic John Hughes feature
film. We know that thanks
to some careful digging by the
Web site Baseball Prospectus in
2011. It discovered Ferris
and his pals saw the Chicago
Cubs play the Atlanta Braves at
Wrigley Field on June 5,
1985.
On the "NewsHour" online: A
list of the 50 best restaurants
in the world was released
this week. But before you go
make your reservations, take a
quick tour of the top 10 and see
how
much a typical tasting menu will
cost you. We have those prices,
plus a photo gallery,
on our home page. Yes,
that's at PBS.org/NewsHour.
And
a
reminder about some upcoming
programs from our PBS
colleagues.
Gwen Ifill is preparing for
"Washington Week," which airs
later this evening. Here's a
preview.
GWEN IFILL: Who's watching
whom? Who's protecting whom?
And what role does our
government play? The Supreme
Court finds room to agree or why
you can't yell fire in
a crowded theater. And foreign
new candidates bring the 2016
total to 14, with more to come.
We explore later tonight on
"Washington Week" -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On "PBS NewsHour
Weekend" Saturday: Are drug
companies paying to keep
lower-cost generic drugs off the
market? We update the story.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm Judy Woodruff.
Have a great weekend.
Thank you, and good night.